Welcome to Slash Forward. If there were anything
better than going on holiday in Mexico with a
group of your best buds, it would probably
be spending a portion of your time there
exploring the rich history of the region’s
long-forgotten ancient cultures. Of course,
if in so doing you happened to find
yourselves forcefully relegated to
the top of a mysterious pyramid and, over
time, found your skin to be crawling with
little wormlike larvae that have to be cut
out from deep below the surface of your skin,
that might tip the balance toward making the
trip not worthwhile. We’ll get a more concrete
understanding of what all this entails as we
take a tour through the 2008 film The Ruins.
Set in a remote rainforest, a group of college
friends accompany a recent acquaintance to a
secluded archaeological site to round out their
trip. But, by disturbing the grounds, a community
of locals force them to the top of the pyramid
and keep them there for unknown reasons. The
group then finds themselves struggling to survive
under threat of being killed for trying to leave,
insufficient rations to sustain them atop
the structure for more than a day or so,
and Jeff’s insatiable desire to prove the value
of his first year medical school education through
constantly trying to cure his friends of what
ails them by cutting off pieces of their bodies.
Be sure to drop a like or a comment on the video
if you happen to have an annoying friend like that
and, while you’re here, check out some of my other
videos. They go down so easy. Let’s get to it.
We open on a woman in a cave, or perhaps some
ruins, crying out for help. Unfortunately,
no one ever comes, and then she’s
dragged off into the darkness.
Then we take a sweeping view of a rainforest
before zooming in on a gang of nubile,
young friends hanging out and playing Gin -
as was so popular with college students back
in 2008. Jeff and Stacy finish up their
game as Eric returns with margaritas.
But all of this is put on hold when Amy
realizes she is missing one of her most
important earrings. Observed from across
the way, this is the perfect opportunity
for a save by Mathias - a swarthy gentleman
of Germanic descent. He produces the precious,
missing trinket and is rewarded with a drink,
which leads naturally to casual conversation.
Mathias is alone today, because his bro went to
visit his girlfriend - an archeologist working at
an excavation site. They were looking to sitesee
a local treasure that’s more off-the-beaten path,
so he invites them to accompany him tomorrow
if they’re interested. After a brief survey,
they unanimously agree to partake in what the
locals would likely consider a desecration.
That night the gang prepares for
their excursion by getting blasted.
Jeff is first back to the room, leaving Mathias
to pick up the slack left by Jeff’s unwillingness
to dance the night away. Pretty soon,
Eric and Stacy are peeling Amy off him.
The next morning Jeff finishes his run to find
Mathias and Dmitri copying the map so Dmitri’s
cabal of Hellenes can catch up with them once they
sleep off their drink. Jeff then runs up to gather
the troops. Feeling sick and generally sullen
about the idea that Jeff will be leaving for
med school, Amy takes some convincing to get her
going. But Jeff is a persuasive man and natural
leader, so soon we find them hopping off the
bus at the last civilized stop on their journey.
They find a cab, but the taximan warns them
to steer clear of that particular pyramid,
but what do the locals ever really know about
the various sites and attractions surrounding
their town? And soon they’re heading down the old
dusty trail. They get dropped off at Heinrich’s
Jeep where it is officially remote enough to
preclude the possibility of using cell phones.
For all except Mathias, who has a specialty
phone specifically for this purpose.
Once that’s established, they begin the
eleven mile hike into the dense rainforest.
In no time at all they reach the last major
landmark before arriving at their destination.
They are observed from afar by some curious
children. While they attempt to communicate
with them, Mathias finds the trail, which had been
intentionally covered over with some large fronds.
The girls do wonder about this, and consider
whether it is wise to carry on, but their second
thoughts are overruled and the group continues
under the watchful eye of a young Mayan girl.
And see? They find the site very quickly, making
this simple trip completely worthwhile in every
possible way. They have only just begun to ponder
which stairs they will climb first when a very
serious man busts through the treeline, dismounts
and shouts at them in an unknown language.
Jeff is an expert at dealing with people, so he
offers up some dinero. This offering is declined,
and then some more horsemen emerge. They
try to impart that they’re simply there
to meet up with their bro, but
this also doesn’t do the trick.
As they try to pierce the language
barrier and find a common understanding,
Amy snaps some choice photos to try to capture the
essence of this confusing moment. Unfortunately,
it only adds to it as they are worked into
a frenzy. Thinking they desire the camera,
Dmitri attempts to help deliver it to them,
but instead absorbs an arrow and a headshot.
It then becomes unclear whether their attackers
are warning them away or forcing them up,
but when even more armed reinforcements arrive
they elect to go up. At least that way there
is still a chance that they might find Heinrich.
Unfortunately, both tents are empty and, even with
such a clear line of sight, they don’t get any
better signals up here. Also, Mathias’s phone was
confiscated by the man. They check to see if there
is any safe way down, but they find themselves
surrounded. Then, Heinrich is sighted - covered
head to toe by an invasive weed with an arrow in
his chest. The group is dumbfounded by the sudden,
drastic, negative change in their situation.
Jeff watches and notes that many locals seem
to be gathering outside and setting up a camp.
Meanwhile, Eric wonders what happened to the
archaeologist while they also notice that Mathias
seems to be having an allergic reaction of some
type from touching the plants. Despite the poor
outlook, Jeff remains optimistic that either
Dmitri’s friends will soon be there to help,
or the hotel will notify someone when
they fail to check out the next day.
His assertiveness here makes
him the leader by default.
But then, they hear a ringing. Mathias points out
that Heinrich had a fancy phone similar to his,
and it appears to be getting a signal even deep
within the stony structure. So they scramble to
try to safely descend into the pit before it
goes off. Unfortunately, despite their intent,
they experience the opposite outcome. They have
to push past their initial shock when signs of
life begin to emanate from the dark. Jeff sets to
checking the remainder of the rope for structural
integrity so they can lower one of the girls into
the pit. I mean, he would go himself, but he’s
manning the crank. If he left, who would crank
then? Stacy volunteers and is soon descending
deep into the heart of the pyramid. They reach the
end of the rope, but she’s not yet at the bottom.
However, with Mathias begging for help, she
goes ahead and hops down and in her white pants!
She works to get some light down there, so she can
more easily extricate the glass currently making
love to her knee. Meanwhile, up top, they work
on figuring out how to make some extra rope while
down under Mathias reveals that he can’t feel his
legs. Stacy calls up this news and also reports
that it smells like shit down there, which Mathias
tries to determine if he should take as an insult.
Jeff immediately springs into action despite Amy’s
protests about the dangers of moving someone with
a broken spine. Desperate for an alternative she
runs down to ask for help, but finds the language
barrier to still be a hindrance. Upon reaching
peak frustration she throws some weed at them,
hitting a young boy. Their instant reaction
gives some hint as to what their major deal is
you all have.
As the sun goes down, Amy is lowered with a
makeshift backboard via an elongated rope.
They are still a few feet shy of rock bottom,
but Stacy insists on getting this wrapped up
so they can get the hell out of there. So
they very carefully prepare to lift him, but
ultimately provide an extreme
chiropractic manipulation.
Now that he’s up, Jeff recommends not moving
him again, and also thinks they should look
for some Aspirin. In doing so, he finds
Dmitri’s plane ticket for the next day,
providing additional encouragement
that his countrymen should be there
tomorrow to try to find him
after he misses his flight.
They then bed down for the night, taking
shifts to keep an eye on the locals.
Sometimes from very close up.
The next morning Jeff chooses violence - showing
them vines what he thinks about them. Then Stacy
wakes up feeling an unusual tingle in her leg.
This time, it ain’t Eric. When the leaves fail
to brush off she realizes that the vines
didn’t just creep on her, they crept up in
her. Eric gently pulls it out as Mathias also
senses something wrong with his legs. When they
go to check them out, a similar, horrifying
problem is revealed. As they process this,
Eric recognizes that they have spores growing on
their clothes as well, but then they’re distracted
again when a ringing sound reminds them that while
they were in the pit, they never got the phone.
Jeff makes quick preparations to send the ladies
in and search it out as it may represent their
only chance for salvation. Once down there, they
light up and venture into the weeds - driven on
by the constant ringing of the phone. They are
startled by a shuffling noise from the thick bush,
which probs wasn’t her. And, while this
unknown victim does have a fairly modern phone,
it isn’t the one that’s currently ringing. So
they continue on, until Amy comes to discover
that the sound is actually emanating from
the undulating stamen of the flowers.
The vines then make their move, and the attack
forces them to climb back through the brush as
the vine system attempts to hinder their
escape. They’re cranked up just in time
and relay the unfortunate phone news. Amy’s
sole focus is now on getting off that pyramid,
as they recognize that they’re being forced
into an involuntary quarantine. However,
Jeff remains insistent that the safest option
is to continue to wait, assured by his privilege
that someone must already be searching out
the missing gringos. So, they hang in there.
With all future goals and activities now moot,
they narrow in on surviving while rationing and
conserving their resources. Stacy mentions that
she still has the strange feeling of the vine
being inside her probing around. But Jeff is
focused on the danger of sepsis developing
in Mathias’s dirty leg wounds. Intoxicated by
the allure of becoming the talk of med school,
he is encouraged to perform a double field
amputation of Mattie’s legs under the auspices
of saving his life. There is some reluctance from
the group, but Mathias gives his full consent.
Jeff gives a complimentary bite
leather, mostly for ceremonial purposes
as he insists that Mathias wouldn’t have any
feeling in his legs. Despite his assuredness,
when he brings the stone down to break the bone,
it certainly seems like he’s feeling everything.
Jeff sets to work amidst the screams,
and sloppily, but with drive and purpose,
disconnects his lower extremities. Once done,
any sense of satisfaction is quickly forgotten
in the face of the horror presented by
the vines coming to take their meal.
That night Jeff goes back down to work some things
out with their captors. While up top Eric provides
a little comfort to Amy, resulting in Stacy
insisting that she heard them making love in the
moonlight - and right in front of her, which is
so disrespectful. While they’re all distracted by
this, the vines take advantage of the opportunity
and finish off Mathias. Jeff pulls them out,
but it proves to be too late. Stacy then gets
real dramatic about having some vine in her,
and they’re all taken aback when the
flowers begin to mimic her in concert
The next morning the survivors observe as the
tribesmen salt the soil around the pyramid to
keep plant growth contained. Jeff also
notes how creatures of various types
seem to know to stay away from the area,
indicating it must be very old. Then Eric
calls everyone over for an update on Stace,
who does, in fact, have some of that stuff
creeping around inside her. This gives Jeff
a prime opportunity to get to cutting again.
He goes in deep and really does a job of
cleansing her body. I mean, she’s gotta
feel at least a little better, right? She must,
because she wants to keep cutting everything,
even beyond Jeff’s threshold, so you know it’s
bad. He insists they stop, but she’s definitely
showing additional signs of infection, which
they confirm for her by refusing eye contact.
This prompts Eric to declare his intent to make
a break for it that evening, no matter what.
But later on, during nap time, Stacy goes out
on her own to look for her friend, knife, while
under the influence of the flowers. The others
wake up and emerge from the tent to find her
engaging in a significant mutilation event with
the knife, which she also employs against all who
try to stop her. After Eric bleeds out internally,
the vines again come to clean up the mess that’s
left over. Stacy begs to be put out of her misery
and, having not yet taken the Hippocratic Oath,
Jeff obliges as the locals listen to the
hell unfolding at the top of the pyramid.
After a bit we return and find Jeff slathering
Amy in blood, providing instructions for her
escape plan, including how to reach the Jeep. He
then takes her down, making a big show of saying
goodbye to her at the foot of the pyramid, and
then playing like he’s thinking about making a run
for it. He’s really just laying down a distraction
to facilitate her escape, but he does too damn
good a job of acting, as they end up filling him
with arrows before he is returned to the vines.
Meanwhile, Amy has broken through the barrier and
goes tearing through the woods as arrows whiz by
all around. She manages to make it to the
trailhead and drive off in the Jeep. But,
as she begins to feel the relief of her escape,
her affliction is revealed. Shortly thereafter,
Dmitri’s buddies emerge into the clearing,
completely unaware of what’s in store.
The Ruins is another one of those movies that just
kind of came and went. Although its box office
was fairly good in comparison to the budget, it
wasn’t a massive hit. Despite that, I think this
is one that deserves to be held up as a stand out
from that time period. It takes a fairly simple
premise and does a really good job of delivering
on it. There are a few places where it could have
been tightened up a bit. The confusion about what
the pyramid protectors wanted was done very well,
but I think they went a bit overboard
telegraphing the issue by having Amy just
fully submerge herself in the vines. Especially
since they made the issue so overt later when
the little boy had to be executed. If they had
relied on that later scene to clarify things,
they could have maintained a little more suspense.
Also, the story is very much character-driven,
since it revolves around a small group of
people in a tight location. Despite that,
they devote two scenes to Eric and Stacy’s sex
life, which didn’t really add anything to the
story. It’s not necessarily bad, but it just seems
like this time could have been spent in other ways
to build up other, more relevant aspects.
Although, I suppose it’s possible that it
served a practical purpose in potentially making
the film more marketable overall. Either way, I
think these are minor issues. The film was overall
pretty good and it went hard when it needed to.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you
can support the channel through
donations or merch. Any donation unlocks
uncensored movie reviews of Lifeforce,
Under the Skin and Possessor, with others to
be added over time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.